





Elvin.Org                                                      D. Arnold
Preliminary INTERNET-DRAFT                                     I. Lister
                                                            Mantara, Inc
Expires: 13 Feb 2008                                         13 Aug 2007


                     Elvin Federation Protocol 1.0
                    draft-elvin-federation-10-00.txt


   1.  Status of this Memo

   This document is an Internet-Draft and is NOT offered in accordance
   with Section 10 of RFC2026, and the author does not provide the IETF
   with any rights other than to publish as an Internet-Draft.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet- Drafts as reference mate-
   rial or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


   2.  Abstract

   This document describes a protocol for forwarding message traffic
   between Elvin routers.  It provides administrative filtering of both
   incoming and outgoing traffic.

   It has no effect on the protocol used for Elvin client to router com-
   munications, or between router nodes in an Elvin cluster.


   3.  Introduction

   The Elvin protocol provides undirected, content-routed messaging
   between any number of clients connected to a single cluster of
   routers. The Elvin cluster protocol allows these clients to be con-
   nected to any of a group of cooperating, typically co-located
   routers, by tightly joining these routers into a single logical
   entity.

   The purpose of this document is to define a protocol in the Elvin
   suite that allows loose joining of routers, each potentially located



Arnold and Lister          Expires in 6 months                 [Page 1]

Internet Draft        Elvin Federation Protocol 1.0          August 2007


   anywhere on the Internet, into a federated Elvin service.

   This protocol allows for administrative control over each autonomous
   system and its connections to other parts of the Elvin federation,
   including control over what notifications are permitted to travel in
   and out of each router.


   4.  Terminology

   This document discusses Elvin clients, client libraries and routers.

   An Elvin router is a server process that runs on a single machine.
   It acts as a distribution mechanism for Elvin messages. A client is a
   program that uses an Elvin router, via a client library for a partic-
   ular programming language.  A client library implements the Elvin
   protocols and manages clients' connections to an Elvin router.

   Further details of the Elvin protocol, its entities and their roles
   is available in [EP].


   4.1.  Notation Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.


   5.  Basic Operation

   Elvin routers, in addition to whatever client connection protocols
   they support, use a separate router federation protocol.  This proto-
   col has several purposes:

   1. management of the router(s)

   3. clustering of local routers for scaling or reliability

   3. linking routers to form wide-area routing networks


   5.1.  Wide-area Federation

   Wide-area federation (in future referred to simply as federation) is
   used to link islands of Elvin address spaces together into a single
   routing network.


   6.  Abstract Protocol







Arnold and Lister          Expires in 6 months                 [Page 2]

Internet Draft        Elvin Federation Protocol 1.0          August 2007


   6.1.  Protocol Overview

   An Elvin router may be statically configured with an initial state.
   This state may include directions to initiate federation relation-
   ships with other routers or to accept federation relationships with
   other routers.

   Federation relationships consist of a reliable one-to-one connection
   between two routers and may optionally include administrative filters
   at each end.  Two federated routers share information about their own
   registered subscriptions in order to forward matching Elvin notifica-
   tion traffic to each other.  The subscription information is shared
   in the form of an abstract syntax tree of a single aggregate Elvin
   subscription expression representing the union of all subscriptions
   registered at a router (excluding that registered by the other router
   in the federation relationship).

   Incoming notifications are evaluated for forwarding to connected
   routers in addition to any connected clients.  Handling of a notifi-
   cation received from a federated router is largely the same as han-
   dling a notification received from a client, with the exception that
   the notification is not sent back to the router from which it was
   received.

                                     +--------------+ Elvin
      +----------+                   | +----------+ | Federation
      | Producer | ---NotifyEmit------>| Router 1 | |
      +----------+                   | +----------+ |
                                     |      |       |
                                     |      |       |
                                     |      V       |
      +----------+                   | +----------+ |
      | Consumer | <--NotifyDeliver--- | Router 2 | |
      +----------+                   | +----------+ |
                                     +--------------+
                                                      NOTIFICATION PATH


   6.2.  Packet Types

   The protocol is defined in terms of individual packet specifications.
   Each packet has two unique identifiers: a string name and a number.
   In a concrete protocol implementation, if packets are identified
   using a number or string, these values SHOULD be used.

   The numeric identifiers for new kinds of packets have been chosen
   such that they do not overlap with the identifiers used for the Elvin
   client protocol, and both sets of identifiers can be encoded using a
   single byte. Some packets share the same semantics as in the Elvin
   client protocol, so the same identifiers are used.







Arnold and Lister          Expires in 6 months                 [Page 3]

Internet Draft        Elvin Federation Protocol 1.0          August 2007


     ----------------------------------------------------------------
     Packet Type                     Abbreviation         Identifier
     ----------------------------------------------------------------
     Federation Connection Request   FedConnRqst             192
     Federation Connection Reply     FedConnRply             193
     Federation Subscription Replace FedSubReplace           194
     Federation Notify               FedNotify               195

     Disconnect                      Disconn                  53
     Acknowledge                     Ack                      65
     Negative Acknowledge            Nack                     48
     Drop Warn                       DropWarn                 62
     Test Connection                 TestConn                 63
     Confirm Connection              ConfConn                 64

     ----------------------------------------------------------------



   6.2.1.  Federation Connection Request

   A router, configured with filters and addressing information for a
   remote router, initiates a connection using this request.

     struct FedConnRqst {
       id32 xid;
       uint32 major_version;
       uint32 minor_version;
       string router_domain;
     };

   The xid field is a number identifying this request.  It must be
   unique among all outstanding requests on any one connection at any
   one time.  Successive requests SHOULD use an xid that increments by
   one for each request.

   The router_domain parameter is a unique UTF-8 string identifying the
   local router or cluster.  It is used to prevent importation of traf-
   fic which has previously been exported from the local domain.  This
   means that it MUST be globally unique for each single router or clus-
   ter, and it MUST be identical for each router within a single clus-
   ter.  It is RECOMMENDED that this name be based on the DNS domain
   name or IP address of the router's host machine(s).

   A router receiving a FedConnRqst MUST check that it is compatible
   with the protocol version specified in the packet. To be compatible,
   the router must be able to use a version of the protocol with the
   major component being equal to the version requested, and the minor
   component being greater than or equal to the version requested. If a
   router cannot meet this requirement it MUST immediately close the
   connection, as for a protocol violation.

   The version of the protocol specified in this document has a major
   component of one (1) and a minor component of zero (0).  This can be



Arnold and Lister          Expires in 6 months                 [Page 4]

Internet Draft        Elvin Federation Protocol 1.0          August 2007


   represented in text form as 1.0.


   6.2.2.  Federation Connection Reply

   A router, having received a FedConnRqst, responds with either a Nack
   (if the request was unsuccessful) or a FedConnRply (if the request
   was successful).  If the router_domain in the received FedConnRqst is
   the same as the router_domain of any other known directly connected
   router or the same as the receiving router's own router_domain, the
   router MUST respond with a Nack.

     struct FedConnRply {
       id32 xid;
       string router_domain;
     };

   The xid field MUST be set to the same value as that in the FedCon-
   nRqst being responded to.  A FedConnRply MUST NOT be sent other than
   in response to a FedConnRqst.

   The router_domain field contains a unique identifier for the sending
   router or cluster, in the same way as the router_domain sent in a
   FedConnRqst.


   6.2.3.  Federation Subscription Replace

   Each of the linked routers may optionally provide a compiled Elvin
   subscription expression, known as the pull_filter, describing the
   traffic requested by clients of the local router. Either of the
   linked routers may request a replacement of their registered
   pull_filter at any time during the life of the connection, by sending
   a FedSubReplace.

     struct FedSubReplace {
       id32 xid;
       SubAST pull_filter;
     };

   The pull_filter MAY be different from the subscription database of
   the sender; for example it MAY be made more general to minimise
   updates caused by minor changes to the local subscription database,
   and/or it MAY be made more specific to prevent importation of notifi-
   cations known to be unwanted (despite matching local subscriptions).

   The receiving router MUST process the request, and return either an
   Ack or a Nack, depending on the validity of the SubAST.









Arnold and Lister          Expires in 6 months                 [Page 5]

Internet Draft        Elvin Federation Protocol 1.0          August 2007


   6.2.4.  Federation Notify

   Notification traffic is sent between the routers using the FedNotify
   packet.

     struct FedNotify {
       NameValue attributes[];
       boolean deliver_insecure;
       Keys keys;
       string routing[];
     };

   The routing list consists of the unique signatures of domains that
   have previously seen this packet.  For those routers with multiple
   federation links, packets MUST NOT be forwarded through links whose
   registered signature is already present in the routing list.

   Before forwarding a FedNotify, a router MUST insert its own signature
   into the routing list to prevent it being delivered again.  However,
   if a notification is received where the routing list contains the
   signature of the receiving router, it MUST be silently dropped.

   A router SHOULD NOT forward a FedNotify to a router that has not
   requested it i.e. a notification that does not match the router's
   most recently positively acknowledged pull_filter.

   A router MAY choose to not forward a FedNotify to a router that has
   requested it (i.e. a notification that matches the router's most
   recently positively acknowledged pull_filter). Some cases in which a
   router might choose to do this are if the router or its network con-
   nections are overloaded, or if it has been configured not to send
   this type of notification.


   6.3.  Configuration

   It is beyond the scope of this document to describe how implementa-
   tions may be configured to control the flow of notifications between
   routers, but there are some important points for implementers and
   administrators to consider.

   The Elvin federation protocol assumes a that federation links are
   configured to form a spanning tree. This means that for any given
   pair of routers there is only one possible route for any given noti-
   fication to travel from one router to the other.

   Future revisions of the protocol may provide for automatic detection
   or configuration.


   7.  Security Considerations

   Multiple concrete implementations of the abstract protocol mean that
   the federation links can have many different properties, depending



Arnold and Lister          Expires in 6 months                 [Page 6]

Internet Draft        Elvin Federation Protocol 1.0          August 2007


   upon the protocol stack(s) used.

   The Elvin federation protocol relies on any necessary authentication
   being performed by the underlying transport protocols, for example by
   verification of SSL certificates.

   Administrators of Elvin routers should be careful to ensure that only
   appropriate combinations of protocols are offered by their routers.


   8.  IANA Considerations

   The TCP port 2916 has been reserved by the IANA for the Elvin federa-
   tion protocol using the concrete XDR marshalling protocol.


   1.


   Author's Address

   David Arnold
   Ian Lister

   Email: specs@elvin.org
































Arnold and Lister          Expires in 6 months                 [Page 7]

Internet Draft        Elvin Federation Protocol 1.0          August 2007


   2.  Full Copyright Statement

   Copyright (C) 2000-2007 Elvin.Org All Rights Reserved.

   This specification may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
   any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, record-
   ing, or by any information storage or retrieval system, providing
   that the content remains unaltered, and that such distribution is
   under the terms of this licence.

   While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this
   specification, Mantara Software assumes no responsibility for errors
   or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the informa-
   tion herein.

   Elvin.Org welcomes comments on this specification.  Please address
   any queries, comments or fixes (please include the name and version
   of the specification) to the address below:

       Email: specs@elvin.org

   All trademarks and registered marks belong to their respective own-
   ers.


































Arnold and Lister          Expires in 6 months                 [Page 8]

